From the New York Times, [music] I'm
Natalie Kitro. This is the Daily.
[music]
In the days since deposing Nicholas
Maduro, President Trump has given
several justifications [music]
for his dramatic action in Venezuela.
>> Number one, the drugs are pouring into
the country. You know that. Number
[music] two, the people are pouring into
the country. were.
>> But the thing Trump is most focused
[music] on, the thing he keeps pointing
to as central to his ambitions,
>> we're going to take back the oil that
frankly we should have taken back a long
time ago,
>> is oil. [music]
>> We're taking back what was taken from
us. They took our oil industry. We built
that entire oil industry.
>> Specifically, opening Venezuela's vast
oil fields to American companies.
>> They stole our assets like we were
babies. and the United States did
absolutely nothing about it. [music] So
now we're doing everything about it.
>> Today, my colleague Anatoli Kermanav
[music]
explains the history behind Trump's
claim that this is our oil and what it
would really take [music] to get it
back.
[music]
It's Tuesday. January [music] 13th.
Anatoli, we're here today to talk to you
about Trump's interest in Venezuelan
oil. And the reason that we are again
turning to you is that you famously for
some of us former Latin America
correspondents spent nearly a decade in
Venezuela covering the country when
Maduro first came to power. And you are
a student of and our in-house expert on
Venezuelan oil. So, welcome back to the
show.
>> Thanks for having me again, Natalie.
>> Let's just start with a basic question,
which is why is Trump so focused on
Venezuelan oil?
>> Venezuela is a quintessential prostate.
It is arguably the first prostate. It is
a nation that has been built by oil that
defines itself through oil. And if you a
American president who sees the world
through prism of natural resources, who
sees the world through the geopolitics
of energy and control of energy
resources, then Venezuela is your
natural target. As my colleague Rebecca
Elliot wrote, you have a country that is
today the world's largest oil producer,
the United States, targeting the country
with the world's biggest oil reserves,
Venezuela. It is in a way a natural
relationship, a natural tango. Of
course, shaped by drama, shaped by
cooperation, by competition, by all
sorts of conflicts, but it is a
collision of two countries that are in
different ways shaped by oil,
>> right? And it's difficult obviously to
get inside the president's head, but we
do have his public statements on this,
right? He's gone out and offered a very
explicit justification for some of this,
which is he's saying this is going to
make the US and Venezuela a lot of
money.
>> Absolutely. Yeah. For us as reporters,
one of the most shocking or unexpected
elements of this whole drama, just how
explicit, how direct Trump is being
about his motives. the central the
driving aspect of this whole campaign
against Venezuelan President Nicholas
Maduro is about oil. This is the
crucifix of this entire issue. And the
other thing that he's been saying other
than this is about oil. We can make
money on this is that this is rightfully
ours that the US has a claim to this
oil. So walk me through those
statements. What are he and his allies
saying there really? Well, this is
perhaps the most contentious and complex
parts of the story that Trump is saying
that the US is reclaiming what's
rightfully theirs, what's rightfully
America's. And this sentiment has been
echoed by his officials. You know, his
top advisor Steven Miller has said, and
I'm quoting, American sweat, ingenuity,
and toil created the oil industry in
Venezuela. It's tyrannical expropriation
was the largest recorded theft of
American wealth and [clears throat]
property.
>> Right? I remember that post from Miller.
It was quite strident and direct.
>> Yeah, it's really wild and exaggerated
and incendury, but it does contain a
grain of truth. And to understand
where he comes from, you have to go back
all the way back to the beginning of
Venezuela's oil industry a century ago.
>> Okay, take me there. Tell me that story.
I want to understand where the grain of
truth in that statement really is.
[music]
When Columbus discovered Venezuela 500
years ago, he thought he'd found an
earthly paradise.
>> Venezuela was a land of mountains,
plains, and jungles, and with only a
handful of Spanish towns and villages.
[music]
>> So before the oil was discovered,
Venezuela was sparssely populated,
underdeveloped, full of poverty, and
very little infrastructure.
>> The first Europeans came to Venezuela
seeking gold. They later found black
gold, crude oil. On December 14th, 1922,
an oil well being drilled near Lake
Maraco blew out at the rate of 100,000
barrels a day.
>> Oil was discovered in Venezuela at the
very beginning of the 20th century and
the industry really takes off in the
1920s. The boom that was propelled a few
years later [music] by mass migration of
American oil workers.
>> Foreign oil companies operate the wells.
And those American oil workers, they
started building towns built in the
American way with [music] American
grids, suburban houses, schools,
baseball, social [music] activities,
churches. And those towns gradually grew
into cities and then metropolises again
imitating American way of life.
>> Oil workers like Juan Ramirez with their
high salaries and many company benefits
[music] have achieved a way of life
which is very similar to that of workers
in the most advanced countries of Europe
and North America. Local employees which
are hired by American oil companies
become [music] the backbone of a new
middle class.
>> The Ramirez family lives in a modern
community planned and built by the oil
company.
>> The oil money has been spent on public
buildings, skyscrapers, broad avenues,
and highways.
>> The streets became highways. The social
clubs became malls. The suburban houses
became skyscrapers. Venezuela's oil
capital, Marako, in the west is known
here as the Houston of Venezuela. M
>> the hope is that the future holds more
jobs, better living standards, better
homes.
>> Venezuela basically answering modernity
through the prison of how American oil
workers saw the world.
>> To Venezuela's people, oil is
everything.
>> Wow. It's interesting. You're saying
basically that the Americans left a huge
mark on Venezuela and not just seen in
the oil industry itself, but all over
the country. It's funny what you're
saying about the architecture does ring
true. I haven't spent that much time in
Caracus, but it's right that it looks
more like an American capital than you'd
see elsewhere in Latin America.
>> That's right. And after the influx of
American workers, American capital, the
oil production starts to rise rapidly.
And in the 1950s, Venezuela was the
world's largest oil exporter. It is
making tremendous amounts of money. And
Venezuela's dictator at the time, Marcos
Paris Jimenez, he uses that oil wealth
and pours it into the country's
infrastructure. He starts building
massive tunnels, bridges, highways.
Venezuela becomes filled with this
massive grandiose projects that put it
way ahead of its peers in Latin America.
It becomes one of the richest countries
in the region, arguably one of the
richest countries in the world. And it
starts to attract migration from all
across the world, from other corners of
Latin America, from Asia, from southern
Europe, from Lebanon. Venezuela becomes
this melting pot of cultures, all drawn
to the wealth provided by the oil
industry that is fueling the economy,
fueling the country's development and
reshaping it as this mecca of modernity
at a region that was still extremely
poor and backward at the time. So
obviously there is a clear benefit for
Venezuelans in all of this. They're
reaping rewards from this boom, but
they're also seeing that there's a bunch
of foreign companies, right, making a
lot of money off of selling what is
their main natural resource. So as good
as those times may have been, was there
any tension there?
>> There was. There's a growing number of
Venezuelans began to question the the
status quo which gives the bulk of the
wealth towards the corporations and
Venezuela really becomes the driver of a
movement that ended up shaping the
world. A movement called resource
nationalism.
>> And what is that? What's resource
nationalism?
>> This is a concept that states that
ultimately natural resources belongs to
the citizens of a state. That the
country's national wealth belongs to its
people and not to the corporations that
are exploiting these resources. Hm. And
when is this taking hold? Just give me a
sense of time here. [snorts]
>> So in late 50s a Venezuelan statesman
called Juan Pablo Peris Alonso travels
to the Middle East.
He goes to the other world producing
nations and convinces them if we bond
together, if we stick together, we can
assert our sovereignty, we can bring
more wealth to our people and we can
minimize the influence of corporations
in our society. And this becomes OPAC
which is basically a group of oil
nations that together agree on how much
oil is produced between them thereby
setting the prices and setting the pace
of a global economy. The idea behind
this association, which it sounds like
Venezuela [music] is key to helping
create, is that these countries are
going to agree on how many barrels they
want to be in the supply and that that
will affect prices, giving them some
control over the revenues they're
reaping from this [music] production.
>> That's right. And the second crucial
pillar of resource nationalism is
[music]
ownership of resources. So it starts a
chain of legal reforms that assert that
what lays underground belongs [music] to
the states
>> and it culminates in Venezuela in the
1970s when a sensor left pro- US
president at the time Carlos Andres
Paris decides to nationalize Venezuela's
oil industry.
>> [music]
>> And what is the nationalization of
Venezuela's oil actually look like? How
does that play out?
>> So, Carson Paris chooses a relatively
consiliatory path. This is a cold war.
Venezuela is deeply allied the United
States. So he starts talking to the oil
companies. He works out an agreement
where the oil companies are compensated
and are offered contracts under which
they can continue making a lot of money.
And nationalization creates a company
called Petroleios the Venezuela a
stateowned company known here
universally as Pedvesa which now owns
all of Venezuela's oil. And how do
Venezuelans feel about this?
>> Nationalization becomes the source of
national pride. It becomes one of
Venezuela's foundational myths. It
becomes an event that divides Venezuelan
history and before and after. What
Venezuelan people asserting control over
their wealth over what they consider
their birthrights the oil under the
ground. And this company grows and is
working together with foreign oil
companies and it's using some of the
revenues to train Venezuelans in the oil
industry. It is using the money to send
Venezuelans on scholarship to world's
best universities and it becomes a
fairly effective modern company that is
at the cutting edge of the technology of
the time. It was a place where
Venezuelan middle class where
Venezuela's professional class had
formed itself and it becomes the
cornerstone of Venezuelan society and
oil prices are at their peak. The
country is flooded with money with much
of that wealth going into education and
alleviation of poverty. And at you've
described this long tale of history
where American oilmen came in, worked
the fields in Venezuela, got this
incredible industry up and running. And
it sounds like Venezuelans really
actually gained a lot from the
partnership and and from the
nationalization that came from it. They
got this setup where their national
company runs things, where it's working
with foreign companies, and it's fueling
pretty remarkable development.
>> That's right. It was a blessing, but it
was also a curse.
Venezuela became addicted to oil. Its
economy became extremely dependent on
oil. And then in the 80s, the global
economy changed and the oil prices
starts to go down. The price of a barrel
drops from $40 to $10. Wow, that's
pretty massive if you're depending on
this.
>> It's a massive decline, Natalie. And
cracks begin to appear in Venezuela's
economic model. Venezuela goes from a
period of abundance where the state
lavished money on a welfare state to a
period of scarcity where money is
scarce, where public spending is scars,
corruption scandals grow, and people
become increasingly disillusioned and
angry with the system.
>> [music]
>> So what does the Venezuelan government
do? How do they respond to this crisis?
>> The government's solution to this anger
is more oil. [music] They turn to a
remote region of a country called the
Arino oil belt which contains the
world's largest oil reserves. But these
reserves are locked in sludgy tar that
is extremely difficult to process and it
requires cutting edge technology to make
it sellable which Venezuela does not
have at the time but American
corporations do. [music]
So Venezuelan government turns to
foreign investors turns to foreign
multinationals to help them unlock the
wealth hidden in this remote region
[snorts] and they call this process
[music] a perura petrolera the oil
opening. It is natally one of the most
ambitious oil investments program in the
world at the time.
And Pervesa, the state oil company that
has been at the heart of Venezuelan
economy, the heart of its public life,
takes the back seat and allows foreign
companies to take the leads on the
development of these reserves and take
the leads on monetizing the profits from
these reserves.
>> And does it work? Does that arrangement
actually yield anything?
>> The oil starts to flow. Production
starts to increase rapidly and reaches
more than 3 million barrels from about 1
and a half million by 1998. But the
economic stability never comes back.
>> People feel that the oil industry no
longer serves the national interests and
people start to look for solutions
elsewhere
and it fuels the rise of one of the most
important politicians in modern Latin
American history.
an army officer called Chavez.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Okay, let's talk about who Ugo Chavez is
and what his role is in this moment.
>> So, Ugo Chavez grew up in a poor family
in Venezuelan Savana. And like many
working-class children in Venezuela, he
saw his chance to succeed in life in the
armed forces. He joins a military
academy and rises rapidly for the ranks
using his sharp intellect and charisma.
At the same time, he becomes influenced
by nationalist and socialist ideas
floating around during the Cold War. And
in 1998,
>> he launches a political campaign that
takes the country by storm, capturing
support from all segments of Venezuelan
society.
>> And what's his message in this campaign?
His
message is Venezuelan oil belongs to
Venezuelan people. And he rallies
against Pervesa, the state oil company
that he sees has become basically a
thief of western interests, a thief of
Venezuelan elites that have lost touch
with the people that are serving by our
own interests that have turned Pavvesa
into little country club for the rich
and the privileged. [cheering]
And Chavis wins 56% of a popular vote.
Many Venezuelans rejoice when he becomes
president in 1999.
>> And after he wins, how does he make good
on those campaign promises?
>> So his first big project is
redistribution of insulin's wealth. And
that means restructuring completely the
way PVESA works, the cash cow of the
economy. And this sets Chavis on a crash
course against the company's management,
the high priests of Venezuelan oil
industry, the western educated
technocrats that have been running the
Venezuelan oil industry for decades.
Linia.
>> In 2002, Chambers goes on national
television, pretends to be a soccer
referee, blows the whistle, and fires
senior executives.
>> Offside.
Offside.
>> He says, "You are offside."
>> When Chavez replaced the oil company's
top [music] executives with political
appointees, some of whom were radical
Marxists, there was a management revolt.
And this fuels nationwide protest that
brought the country throughout [music]
2002.
This is a crucial moment in Venezuela's
history because many of the country's
middle class realize that this is a
power grab. These people who have for
generations seen as a pedesta as a model
of national development, they see it
being taken apart for a political
project without any consideration for
accountability or democratic [music]
norms. And the year culminates with a
massive oil strike. Pedesta workers
paralyze the country. Exports stop. The
country runs out of gasoline. The
country is in chaos. and tens of
thousands of workers, including most of
the company's skilled workforce, walk
out of [music] jobs, basically
paralyzing the Venezuelan economy.
>> And how does Chavez respond?
>> He fires thousands of Venezuelan
workers, primarily managers and skilled
workers, people that supported the
strike, but also people that made the
company tick, people that made it
competitive and efficient. and he turns
a company into just another tool of his
political populist campaign. And all of
a sudden, this company, but it's known
for its technological expertise and
efficiency, starts opening supermarkets,
providing daycare, uh hosting theater
performances.
>> Well, like like theater sponsored by
Pedesa, like sponsored by your state oil
company. It's hard to think of a
cultural social activity or a product
that you buy that has not been sponsored
or sold by pedesta at the time. It's
literally just becomes the provider of
social services and welfare in the
country. And corruption also increases.
Many of government insiders, many people
close to Chavis become big oil industry
contractors providing PBESA with
services and goods that are overpriced
in return for political loyalty. So this
state-owned company that was such a
source of national pride, this crown
jewel has now been gutted basically of
the expertise and the technical knowhow
that made it work that made it so
functional for so long.
>> That's right. Its revenues fall and
production begins to decline and Chavis
needs to look for other sources of
revenue. It needs to look for other
sources of wealth that fund his populist
projects. So in 2007 he launches another
wave of nationalizations. He takes aim
at the oil opening via a perura.
Remember those international oil
companies that have spent billions to
refine the tar crude locked or inino oil
belt?
>> The Chavez government has told its
foreign partners that they must agree by
May 1st to give Pabesa a 60% stake in
those joint ventures or see them
nationalized altogether.
>> Well, Chavis decides that [music] these
projects now belong to the state. He
forces the companies to give up control
of his projects and give state majority
share.
>> We will never give this our wealth, our
nation to the United States empire. Even
if the Venezuelan oligarchs scream or if
the United States and its multinational
companies attacks us [music] and two
major oil companies, companies that
became Exxon Mobile and Kanuka Phillips
refuse. Exon Mobile wants to be
compensated for the investments it lost
when Chavis nationalized the country's
oil venture.
>> They leave Venezuela and start a series
of legal processes that end up awarding
them billions of dollars in damages that
these companies continue to claim have
been stolen from them by the Chavis
government.
So unlike the first wave of
nationalization in the 1970s, which you
said led to a relatively functional
partnership between the Venezuelan
government and foreign oil companies,
this wave is a lot more contentious. And
I wonder, is this what Trump and his
aids are referring to when they talk
about Venezuela stealing from American
oil companies? Like, is this the moment
that they're referring to? We don't
know. But it is a moment when Venezuela
came closest of defrauding American
companies, came closest to taking away
the money that American companies have
claimed is rightfully theirs. But there
was an exception. Chevron, an oil
company that decided to accept much less
profitable terms, knowing that in the
long term they stand to win. The country
had the biggest oil reserves in the
world. So even if there was a small
chance that those reserves would fall
into company's hands, it would create a
massive amount of wealth for the
corporation and its shareholders.
>> Okay. So at this point, Pedesa is a
shell of its former self. The American
companies are all gone except for
Chevron and Venezuela is now sitting on
this massive oil reserve without really
the capacity to realize the potential.
the infrastructure, the institutions,
they just don't really exist anymore.
>> That's right. And when Chavis dies in
2013, the rickety populist economic
system that he has built falls apart
like a house of cards. [music]
All prices fall and with it the
Venezuelan economy. Starting 2014, it
enters a prolonged period of economic
decline of collapse that ended up being
the biggest economic crisis in modern
history outside a war zone. After 17
years of socialist rule, Venezuela, one
of the world's largest oil producers,
has the world's highest inflation rate.
>> With basic necessities scarce and
inflation skyrocketing, some reports
suggest it [music] could go as high as
700%.
>> And that crisis spreads to the oil
industry. It becomes a shell of itself.
Wells dry up, investments dry up, and
people are scrambling around oil fields,
taking apart the infrastructure, taking
apart pipelines, the fences, the
equipment for scrap. Venezuela's vet oil
fields become a scene out of a dystopian
movie.
>> It's kind of wild to imagine when you
just think about how much money and time
and effort went into building all of
that stuff to have it basically be torn
apart and sold for parts. I mean, things
had to have been really bad at that
point.
>> People are struggling to survive.
Natalie,
>> the people of Venezuela are suffering
from violence, a world record of daily
murders, and random kidnappings.
>> Malnutrition rises massively. Many
people are skipping the meal.
>> I'm very annoyed. [music] Only God knows
what we're going through because in
truth, no one is helping us. The
situation is so severe, the New York
Times reports it's even making it hard
for doctors to keep newborn babies
alive.
>> Millions of people immigrate from a
country. It is difficult to imagine the
scale of collapse that [music] the
country has experienced, losing more
than 3/4 of its economic activity
without a war, without social unrest,
without a major natural [music]
catastrophe. All caused by the populist
policies instituted by Uga Chavez and
continued by his successor Nicholas
Maduro. [music]
And this is a huge blow obviously for a
movement that has made its name selling
itself as a leftist movement that cares
about the people that is working to
prevent this kind of poverty from making
people suffer. So what's the response?
>> So initially the government tries to
just chug along repressing protest and
doubling down on the failed policies
that have brought the country to its
economic knees. But then President Trump
starts his first term and he launches a
campaign to depose Mr. Maduro and his
biggest blow was sanctioning Venezuelan
oil industry. Basically making it
illegal for Venezuela to sell its oil to
the west. This paralyzes Venezuelan oil
experts and paralyzes economic activity
deepening the crisis and it forces
Maduro to change tac. He entrusts one of
his top lieutenants, Dust Rodriguez, to
fix the economy.
>> Now the leader of Venezuela. now the
leader of Venezuela and she embarks on a
long campaign to steady the economy and
the pillar of her campaign is to change
the oil industry and she does it by
launching stealth privatization. On
paper, the oil continues to belong to
Venezuelan people and the state has the
dominant role in Venezuelan oil
projects. But in practice, under the
secret contracts signed by Deli, foreign
companies gain control of Venezuelan oil
fields. They get to make all the
decisions about them and they given a
bigger share of his project's profits.
Investment picks up and so does the oil
production. And by the end of 2025, the
country is producing 1.2 million barrels
per day, a fraction of where it was
before Chavis took power. but a
significant improvement to where the
country was just a few years ago.
>> Okay. So at present you're saying things
are certainly not as dire as they were
but in general the story that you've
told overall paints a picture of extreme
decay in this industry in the
infrastructure around it. An industry
that is very difficult to just start
back up overnight when you start to lose
it given how much it takes to make it
work. Trump is now saying after having
captured Maduro, after supporting Deli,
now as the leader, that US companies are
going to revive Venezuela's oil
industry. What would it take to actually
do that right now?
>> It would take tens of billions of
dollars of investment. Dela Rodriguez
was able to reverse the decline and edge
up the production by taking the
lowhanging fruits, by fixing things that
were easier to fix. And many oil
executives and analysts say that these
lowhanging fruits are coming to an end.
That for Venezuela to significantly
improve its oil production to take it to
a whole other level would require a
massive [snorts] scale investment that
the country has not had for decades. But
there is good news for the oil companies
and that is that everyone knows where
that oil is. The hard part, the
exploration has already been done. The
difficulty is getting it out of the
ground. Remember that most of oil
reserves lie in the sludgy area called
the UNokco oil belt and the cutting edge
multi-billion dollar plants that were
used to process them have largely been
decayed and disintegrated. The thing
about the oil industry Natalie is that
you cannot just turn the spigot back on.
Once something decays, once something
falls apart, it often damages the
geological receptacle holding the oil
and it's extremely expensive and
timeconuming to repair the
infrastructure to repair the reservoirs
and make the oil flow again.
>> And is doing that actually appealing to
American oil executives? Like do they
actually want this challenge? That is
the main question right now, Natalie,
just how committed the companies will be
to taking another bat on Venezuela.
Taking another battle on a country that
has burned them badly in the past. So
there's still a lot of unknowns, but the
cost of sitting on the sidelines is
massive. At stake are literally the
world's largest oil reserves. Just last
week, Trump met the executives of some
of the biggest Western oil companies to
talk about investment in Venezuela. The
plan is for them to spend, meaning our
giant oil companies will be spending at
least $100 billion dollars of their
money, not the government's money.
>> And the broad takeaway was that while
Trump made big promises, touting 100
billion investments in the country,
companies themselves showed interest.
>> For more than a century, Chevron has
been a part of Venezuela's past. uh we
are certainly committed to its uh
present and we very much look forward as
a proud American company to help it
build a better future.
>> But remain cautious
>> there. We have a very long history in
Venezuela. In fact, uh we first got into
Venezuela back in 1940s. Uh we've had
our assets seized there twice and so you
can imagine to reenter a third time
would require some pretty significant
changes from what we've historically
seen here. And very tellingly, Axen
Mobile, one of the world's largest oil
companies and the company that left
Venezuela in 2007 said that
>> if we look at the legal and commercial
constructs and frameworks in place today
in Venezuela, uh, today it's
uninvestable.
>> Venezuela today is uninvestable.
Underline the challenges facing Trump's
plans towards the country's oil
industry.
>> Let's get into some of those challenges.
What are the conditions that you think
need to be present for these companies
to come back and to make the kind of
sustained investments that you would
need to see for the potential of
Venezuela's oil fields to actually be
realized?
>> So, first of all, you have to keep in
mind that Maduro has been gone for just
about a week. The new leader has
replaced them, Deli Rodriguez, she's
basically ruling through the guns of
American warships trained on her
internal enemies.
>> [snorts]
>> The country is filled with armed groups
that have been loyal to Maduro. The
country is filled with weapons. The
country is filled with different
political factions that oppose Deli
Rodriguez and her policies. And the risk
of unrest and violence is significant.
>> What you're describing, Anatoli, is a
situation in which Deli formally holds
power, but she's also contending with
these internal rivals and particularly
figures in the political spectrum that
have a lot of power. not only over the
armed forces in Venezuela, but over
armed groups within the country that if
she doesn't control them and if her
rivals do could cause a lot of trouble.
>> That's right. She's under pressure to
generate wealth, to please the Americans
and get the oil flowing. But at the same
time, she's trying to keep it bay the
hardliners that are just waiting for her
one wrong move in order to pounce and
undermine her government.
>> Okay. So one broad condition for foreign
investment for the oil companies to
return to Venezuela is political
stability which does not seem like a
guarantee at all at this point. What
else?
>> Then come the legal guarantees.
American oil companies have been burned
here before. They have lost billions of
dollars of investments and they want to
make sure that this will not happen
again. And of course, for now, President
Trump is completely focused on getting
Venezuelan oil into the ground and into
the United States, but his term is
running out in three years, and we don't
know who will succeed him, and not do
the oil companies. And this uncertainty
and the scale of required investments is
giving them a pause.
>> Right. It's interesting the point about
Trump leaving office creating some
uncertainty there because essentially
what you're saying is these companies
they operate on very long timelines. So
not being able to forecast out 5 10 15
years in the future that's a real
liability.
>> It is. And of course the world is going
through an electrical revolution where
the structure of how we consume energy
and the energy we need is changing
dramatically. China is winning itself
off the oil by moving towards electric
cars and sustainable energy. And these
companies when they look at the billions
of investments that have to be made,
they are thinking will this oil be
needed in 1015 years time.
>> Okay, just to enumerate these conditions
because they are many and they feel
really monumental. We're talking about
some kind of understanding that there
will be political stability inside
Venezuela and a consistent desire and
ability to collaborate with the United
States as well as a sense that the
revolution in clean energy is not going
to just totally displace oil in the
future. So for a moment, if we set aside
whether all three or any of those
conditions are actually anything that
these companies can bet on and just
assume for a moment that things work out
in their favor and that the investment
flows in, play out that best case
scenario for a minute. If Venezuela and
these oil companies achieve that, what
exactly would the US gain?
>> The US would gain a massive source of
oil and that means that global oil
prices will fall. And that means that
the gasoline prices will fall. The price
that American people pay at the pump
will fall. Remember that affordability
is now the crucial tenant of American
politics. This is a weight dragging down
Republican party in one election after
another. And President Trump's biggest
concern right now is bringing these
prices down and flooding the global oil
market with Venezuelan crude is
potentially one of the measures that
could help him achieve that goal.
>> And [snorts] if we're just still living
in this hypothetical best case, I have
to also imagine that controlling what's
assumed to be the world's largest oil
reserves would give the US a lot of
power geopolitically over our rivals. I
mean, in that case, you really can turn
a spigot on and off.
>> Absolutely. And this would have massive
consequences. Take, for example,
America's relations with Russia, another
nuclear power before. It's currently
negotiating a broad deal focused on the
war in Ukraine. Russia also deres most
of its revenues from oil. And if Trump
is able to set global oil prices by
turning on and off the spigot of
Venezuela's oil bounty, this is going to
make it very difficult for Russia to
achieve its goals without bowing to
America's needs. China, as we said, is
winning itself away from oil. But that
process could take decades and in the
meantime, it is extremely reliant on
imports from other countries. And if
Trump can control the source of those
impacts again, he can force Beijing to
bow to his demands.
>> I want to just push also on one of the
premises of these conversations, which
is that Trump and a future US leader
would actually be able to control
Venezuela's oil. The US does not have at
this point direct control over the
Venezuelan government. And I assume, you
know, down the line, future Venezuelan
leaders may be reluctant, honestly, to
be viewed as simply puppets of the US
government. And if the US military is
not, you know, training those weapons on
Venezuela indefinitely,
how long can that setup really last? Is
the premise of control actually a
fallacy?
>> For now, Natalie, things seems to be
working out in Trump's favor. Venezuelan
interim government has already announced
that it's going to embark on a massive
legal reform, potentially changing the
oil laws to give foreign companies a
greater say in how it's run. And
remember that this government remains
deeply dependent on the implicit threats
of American force to keep its internal
adversaries at bay and appears to be
more than willing to be doing Trump's
bidding.
But Natalie, history shows that such
ambitious, grandio, long-term plans
rarely turn out the way they've been
envisioned. There's just so many
different factors being thrown together
at this historical moment. And the
future of Venezuelan oil industry, and
by extension, the future Venezuelan
people may look very different from the
way Washington sees it now. [music]
>> [music]
>> Well, Anatoli, thank you.
>> It's a pleasure to be here as always.
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Monday, officials in Minnesota and
Illinois sued the Trump administration
over ICE enforcement in their states.
They argued that the mass deployment of
immigration agents violated the
Constitution and [music] infringed on
state sovereignty.
The suits come after a high-profile
[music] ICE campaign in Chicago. And in
the middle of an ongoing and
increasingly tense enforcement blitz in
Minneapolis,
[music] federal officials have defended
their work in both states, saying it's
been necessary [music] given that local
officials haven't cooperated with
President Trump's immigration crackdown.
And federal investigators examining the
fatal shooting of Renee [music] Good are
looking into her possible connections to
activist groups that have been
protesting ICE. [music]
According to people familiar with the
matter who spoke with the Times, they're
also reviewing [music] the actions of
the federal agent who killed her.
[music]
Today's episode [music] was produced by
Ricky Novetski, Caitlyn O'Keefe, Diana
Wyn, and AA [music] Chathurvedy. It was
edited by Lisa Chow with help from MJ
Davis Lim. Fact checked by [music] Susan
Lee, contains music by Dan Powell and
Marian Lozano, and was engineered
[music]
by Alyssa Moxley.
Special thanks to Carlos Prito and Lissa
Anderson.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. [music] I'm
Natalie Kiter. See you tomorrow.